feat(posts): JS Nation & React Summit 2024 post (#451)
M6Web/m6web.github.io: _posts/2024-08-20-js-nation-react-summit-2024.md

description: "A few notes on the combo JS Nation x React Summit Amsterdam 2024 conferences"
author: [f_dubost, y_frommelt]
tags: [conference, frontend, react, javascript]
feature-img: "/images/posts/2024-08-20-js-nation-react-summit-2024/reactSummit.png"
thumbnail: "/images/posts/2024-08-20-js-nation-react-summit-2024/teamBedrock.jpg"
---

The Frontend Bedrock teams were present at the 2024 edition of the _JS Nation_ and _React Summit_ conferences in Amsterdam on 13 & 14 June. We would like to highlight and share some of the subjects we find relevant about our favourite language and framework 🙂 Feel free to explore them further if you are interested.

> 📹 You can watch all the video recordings of the [JS Nation](https://gitnation.com/events/jsnation-2024/talks) and the [React Summit](https://gitnation.com/events/react-summit-2024/talks) talks.

### Lessons for Building Resilient Codebases - Alex Moldovan

> 📹 Watch the [video](https://gitnation.com/contents/lessons-for-building-resilient-codebases)

One of my favourite types of presentation, with concrete things that you can then apply in your daily life as a developer.

Alex sums up his speech in 5 points:

> - **Accept imperfections** in your codebase: perfect is the ennemy of good, shortcuts and exceptions can be taken if they are well documented.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Accept imperfections** in your codebase: perfect is the enemy of good, shortcuts and exceptions can be taken if they are well documented.
```

- **[Colocating code](https://alexmoldovan.dev/code-bites/colocation-is-king)** according to concerns is a way of improving readability and therefore maintainability and efficiency.

> - **Reusability** is not always the better choice vs **duplication**, you should find the right balance, abstraction should come when a piece of code is proven as a long term solution.

Author: L'idée c'était de dire qu'on doit commencer à penser à l'abstraction sur des parties de code seulement quand elles ont démontré qu'elles étaient des solutions à long terme dans le projet.

> - **Reusability** is not always the better choice vs **duplication**, you should find the right balance, abstraction should come when a piece of code is proven as a long term solution.

Author: Tu aurais une proposition plus compréhensible? 😇

> - **Reusability** is not always the better choice vs **duplication**, you should find the right balance, abstraction should come when a piece of code is proven as a long term solution.

Reviewer 2: Ah dans ce cas là c'est simple on peut faire ça:
```suggestion
- **Reusability** is not always the better choice vs **duplication**, you should find the right balance, abstraction should come when a piece of code is proven to be a long term solution.
```

> - **Reusability** is not always the better choice vs **duplication**, you should find the right balance, abstraction should come when a piece of code is proven as a long term solution.

Author: Top, merci 🙏

> - **Readability and understandability** of the code is very important for the future developpers that will maintain your code, leaves comments, break conditions with more than 3 members using intermediate variables.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Readability and understandability** of the code is very important for the future developers that will maintain your code, leaves comments, break conditions with more than 3 members using intermediate variables.
```

> - **Readability and understandability** of the code is very important for the future developpers that will maintain your code, leaves comments, break conditions with more than 3 members using intermediate variables.

Reviewer 3: **praise:** 
```suggestion
- **Readability and understandability** of the code is very important for the future developers that will maintain your code: leave comments, break conditions with more than 3 members using intermediate variables, etc...
```

- Use **Typescript** intensively and try to handle all the possible states of your data.

> At Bedrock, we've always tried to apply a maximum of [best practices](https://tech.bedrockstreaming.com/2021/09/06/web-best-practices.html) including some developped here by Alex, to ensure the maintenability of our web codebase. It seems to be working pretty good since this JS project is now 10 years old!

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
At Bedrock, we've always tried to apply a maximum of [best practices](https://tech.bedrockstreaming.com/2021/09/06/web-best-practices.html) including some developped here by Alex, to ensure the maintainability of our web codebase. It seems to be working pretty good since this JS project is now 10 years old!
```

> At Bedrock, we've always tried to apply a maximum of [best practices](https://tech.bedrockstreaming.com/2021/09/06/web-best-practices.html) including some developped here by Alex, to ensure the maintenability of our web codebase. It seems to be working pretty good since this JS project is now 10 years old!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
At Bedrock, we've always tried to apply a maximum of [best practices](https://tech.bedrockstreaming.com/2021/09/06/web-best-practices.html) including some developed here by Alex, to ensure the maintainability of our web codebase. It seems to be working pretty good since this JS project is now 10 years old!
```

> At Bedrock, we've always tried to apply a maximum of [best practices](https://tech.bedrockstreaming.com/2021/09/06/web-best-practices.html) including some developped here by Alex, to ensure the maintainability of our web codebase. It seems to be working pretty good since this JS project is now 10 years old!

Reviewer 5: On n'a pas fait une conf à ce sujet, d'ailleurs ? Si ça a été enregistré => mettre le lien ?

> At Bedrock, we've always tried to apply a maximum of [best practices](https://tech.bedrockstreaming.com/2021/09/06/web-best-practices.html) including some developped here by Alex, to ensure the maintainability of our web codebase. It seems to be working pretty good since this JS project is now 10 years old!

Author: ```suggestion
At Bedrock, we've always tried to apply a maximum of [best practices](https://tech.bedrockstreaming.com/2021/09/06/web-best-practices.html) including some developped here by Alex, to ensure the maintainability of our web codebase. It seems to be working pretty good since this [JS project is now 10 years old](https://tech.bedrockstreaming.com/comment-ne-pas-jeter-son-application-frontend-tout-les-deux-ans)!
```

> At Bedrock, we've always tried to apply a maximum of [best practices](https://tech.bedrockstreaming.com/2021/09/06/web-best-practices.html) including some developped here by Alex, to ensure the maintainability of our web codebase. It seems to be working pretty good since this JS project is now 10 years old!

Author: ```suggestion
At Bedrock, we've always tried to apply a maximum of [best practices](https://tech.bedrockstreaming.com/2021/09/06/web-best-practices.html) including some developped here by Alex, to ensure the maintainability of our web codebase. It seems to be working pretty good since this [JS project is now 10 years old](https://tech.bedrockstreaming.com/comment-ne-pas-jeter-son-application-frontend-tout-les-deux-ans)!
```

> At Bedrock, we've always tried to apply a maximum of [best practices](https://tech.bedrockstreaming.com/2021/09/06/web-best-practices.html) including some developped here by Alex, to ensure the maintainability of our web codebase. It seems to be working pretty good since this JS project is now 10 years old!

Author: ```suggestion
At Bedrock, we've always tried to apply a maximum of [best practices](https://tech.bedrockstreaming.com/2021/09/06/web-best-practices.html) including some developped here by Alex, to ensure the maintainability of our web codebase. It seems to be working pretty good since this [JS project is now 10 years old](https://tech.bedrockstreaming.com/comment-ne-pas-jeter-son-application-frontend-tout-les-deux-ans)!
```

### Why Your Performance Work Is Not Seen - Vinicius Dallacqua

> 📹 Watch the [video](https://gitnation.com/contents/why-your-performance-work-is-not-seen)

Vinicius addresses an important subject for us, as frontend engineers. We are all concerned about performance and we want to deliver the most optimized product, but we often come up against major obstacles in this area. We already talked about this topic last year when [we attended the We Love Speed conference](https://tech.bedrockstreaming.com/2023/08/11/we-love-speed-2023.html).

> To prove values of performance work, **Lab tools** (like [Lighthouse](https://developer.chrome.com/docs/lighthouse/overview?hl=fr)) & **RUM** (Real User Monitoring) have to be used together. Data collected must be analyzed, optimized and framed to make connections with product concerns. Performance needs to **matter to engineering and product** for a sustainable governance model.

Reviewer 2: <!-- Nitpicks are small, trivial, but necessary changes. Distinguishing nitpick comments significantly helps direct the reader's attention to comments requiring more involvement.  -->
**🤓 nitpick:** ‏
```suggestion
To prove values of performance work, **Lab tools** (like [Lighthouse](https://developer.chrome.com/docs/lighthouse/overview?hl=fr)) & **RUM** (Real User Monitoring) have to be used together. Collected data must be analysed, optimised and framed to make connections with product concerns. Performance needs to **matter to engineering and product** for a sustainable governance model.
```

> To prove values of performance work, **Lab tools** (like [Lighthouse](https://developer.chrome.com/docs/lighthouse/overview?hl=fr)) & **RUM** (Real User Monitoring) has to been used together. Data collected must be analysed, optimised and framed to make connections with product concerns. Performance needs to **matter to engineering and product** for a sustainable governance model.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
To prove values of performance work, **Lab tools** (like [Lighthouse](https://developer.chrome.com/docs/lighthouse/overview?hl=fr)) & **RUM** (Real User Monitoring) have to be used together. Data collected must be analyzed, optimized and framed to make connections with product concerns. Performance needs to **matter to engineering and product** for a sustainable governance model.
```

> To demonstrate the worth of working on performances, **Lab tools** (like [Lighthouse](https://developer.chrome.com/docs/lighthouse/overview?hl=fr)) & **RUM** (Real User Monitoring) have to be used together. Data collected must be analyzed, optimized and framed to make connections with product concerns. Performance needs to **matter to engineering and product** for a sustainable governance model.

Author: ```suggestion
To demonstrate the worth of working on performances, **Lab tools** (like [Lighthouse](https://developer.chrome.com/docs/lighthouse/overview?hl=fr)) & **RUM** (Real User Monitoring) have to be used together. Collected data must be analyzed, optimized and framed to make connections with product concerns. Performance needs to **matter to engineering and product** for a sustainable governance model.
```

As in many areas, the key is to set realistic and achievable objectives and to proceed by iteration: **monitor, measure, report and repeat**.

### Install Nothing: App UIs With Native Browser APIs - Scott Tolinski

> 📹 Watch the [video](https://gitnation.com/contents/install-nothing-app-uis-with-native-browser-apis)

> Scott reveals that we can use the browser's native APIs to build certain UI components easily, whereas we've been using sometimes complex JS to do this for years.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Scott reveals that we can use the browser's native APIs to build certain UI components easily, whereas we've sometimes been using complex JS to do this for years.
```

He shows for example:

- How to build modals with [`<dialog>`](https://developer.mozilla.org/fr/docs/Web/HTML/Element/dialog) element
- How to easily create animated transitions with [View Transition API](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/View_Transitions_API) or with [`@starting-style`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/@starting-style)
- How to create menu with [`<popover>`](https://developer.mozilla.org/fr/docs/Web/HTML/Global_attributes/popover) element
- How to build slideshows with [`scroll-snap`](https://developer.mozilla.org/fr/docs/Web/CSS/scroll-snap-align) CSS properties

> And much more besides, check out all Scott's tips on this [site](https://tolin.ski/talks/install-nothing).

Reviewer 2: <!-- Thoughts represent an idea that popped up from reviewing. These comments are non-blocking by nature, but they are extremely valuable and can lead to more focused initiatives and mentoring opportunities.  -->
**💭 thought:** ‏Pas fan de la phrase sans verbe 😢 
```suggestion
Check all these tips out and much more besides on Scott's [site](https://tolin.ski/talks/install-nothing)!
```

### Testing: do more with less - Eugene Fidelin

> 📹 Watch the [video](https://gitnation.com/contents/testing-do-more-with-less)

> Testing has been a guide and a real challenge since we begin the JS web project at Bedrock in 2015. We are convinced that this is an important part of the sustainability and reliability of the codebase. As a result, we listened to Eugene's point of view with curiosity.

Reviewer 3: **praise:** 
```suggestion
Testing has been a guide and a real challenge since we began the JS web project at Bedrock in 2015. We are convinced that this is an important part of the sustainability and reliability of the codebase. As a result, we listened to Eugene's point of view with curiosity.
```

> [DORA metrics](https://www.datadoghq.com/knowledge-center/dora-metrics/) should be adopted to measure how good your are for shippping software with **4 indicators**:

Reviewer 6: <!-- Typo comments are like todo:, where the main issue is a mispelling.  -->
**typo:** ‏ship**p**ping -> shipping

> [DORA metrics](https://www.datadoghq.com/knowledge-center/dora-metrics/) should be adopted to measure how good your are for shippping software with **4 indicators**:

Author: ```suggestion
[DORA metrics](https://www.datadoghq.com/knowledge-center/dora-metrics/) should be adopted to measure how good your are for shipping software with **4 indicators**:
```

> - deployment frequency,
> - lead time for changes,
> - change failure rate,
> - time to restore service.

Reviewer 3: **praise:** 
```suggestion
- Deployment frequency
- Lead time for changes
- Change failure rate
- Time to restore service
```

The first three are affected by the testing strategy. The _[Testing Trophy](https://kentcdodds.com/blog/the-testing-trophy-and-testing-classifications)_ can help to write the right tests given the **return on investment** of the different forms.

![Testing Trophy: return on investment of the different forms of testing](/images/posts/2024-08-20-js-nation-react-summit-2024/testingTrophy.png)

> Eugene discribes the various steps to build a relibale testing strategy:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Eugene describes the various steps to build a reliable testing strategy:
```

- step 0: enable **static** linters and **type** checks
- step 1: create **integration** tests for all happy and non-happy flows
- step 2: write **unit** tests for reusable parts and code without coverage
- step 3: write very few **e2e** tests only for the most business critical flows
- step 4: use **metrics, tracing, logging** to identify anomalies on production

[In Bedrock's frontend teams](https://tech.bedrockstreaming.com/2021/09/06/web-best-practices.html), we are aligned with these strategy:

- Static testing is a compulsory stage in any project start-up.

> - We have a lot of unit and integration tests (which can be view as e2e tests but we only test the frontend part with mocked backend and 3rd parties).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- We have a lot of unit and integration tests (which can be viewed as e2e tests, but we only test the frontend part with mocked backend and 3rd parties).
```

- A manual homologation phase before deploying any new release run e2e tests: this is a current project to automate most of these tests to save time in the process.
- Production monitoring is one of our mantras: our former boss used to say that _"a non-monitored project is not in production"_.

A [tweet](https://x.com/rauchg/status/807626710350839808) from [Guillermo Rauch](https://x.com/rauchg) can perfectly conclude this topic:

> Write tests. Not too many. Mostly integration.

### Facing Frontend's Existencial Crisis - Ryan Carniato

> 📹 Watch the [video](https://gitnation.com/contents/solidjs-tba)

Ryan shows why JS frameworks, especially React, have recently evolved using new concepts to reduce the runtime at page load.

The size of pages has been increasing over the years. In particular because [SPAs](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Single-page_application) have gained ground in the web world. SPAs are costly because of:

- **code execution and evaluation**,
- **code bundle size**,
- **payload (HTML & data) size**.

> At the same time, devices have improved their performance, but not all of them. As a result, we are faced with a real fact: an app with client-side rendering is slower to display and interact than an app with server-side rendering.

Reviewer 5: Aussi des questions de connectivité et pas que de perf des devices ?

Author: C'est pas faux 👍

> At the same time, devices have improved their performance, but not all of them. As a result, we are faced with a real fact: an app with client-side rendering is slower to display and interact than an app with server-side rendering.

Author: ```suggestion
At the same time, devices have improved their performance, but not all of them. Connectivity can also be a limiting factor, depending on the context of use. As a result, we are faced with a real fact: an app with client-side rendering is slower to display and interact than an app with server-side rendering.
```

In order to reduce each of these three costly aspects, Ryan mentions three concepts that new versions of recent JS frameworks, such as React 19, are developing:

> - **islands**: splitting the page in several blocks and render those which never change only on server side,

Reviewer 3: **praise:** 
```suggestion
- **islands**: splitting the page in several blocks, and render those which never change on server-side only,
```

- **server components**: close to the island concept but with the ability to handle state persistence over the client navigation,
- **resumability**: the ability to defer the hydratation of components until an interaction is requested.

> If you want more details about concepts developped by Ryan, you can read his [article](https://dev.to/this-is-learning/islands-server-components-resumability-oh-my-319d) on this subject.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you want more details about concepts developed by Ryan, you can read his [article](https://dev.to/this-is-learning/islands-server-components-resumability-oh-my-319d) on this subject.
```

### Invisible Hand of React Performance - Ivan Akulov

> 📹 Watch the [video](https://gitnation.com/contents/react-performance-past-and-future)

Like [Charlotte Isambert's explanation of how Suspense works](https://gitnation.com/contents/react-internals), this talk takes us into the inner workings of React. It is often interesting to understand how the library you are using works under the hood so that you can use it properly.

> By comparing behaviors between the lastest React versions, Ivan explains:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By comparing behaviors between the latest React versions, Ivan explains:
```

- how `useEffect` has optimized the browser layout and paint calculation flow comparing to `componentDidMount`,
- how `setState` batching have been optimized in React 18,

> - why the freeze experience if the user interacts during the hydratation phase is much more better by using `Suspense`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- why the freeze experience if the user interacts during the hydratation phase is much better by using `Suspense`.
```

### Why You Should Use Redux in 2024 - Mark Erikson

> 📹 Watch the [video](https://gitnation.com/contents/why-you-should-use-redux-in-2024)

At Bedrock, [we have been using Redux since 2016](https://tech.bedrockstreaming.com/2016/07/04/migrate-smoothly-flux-isomorphic-app-to-redux.html), and we continue to use it. So Mark's arguments will certainly confirm our choice!

> Mark is the creator of [Redux Toolkit](https://redux-toolkit.js.org/). He begin by detailing the pros and cons of using Redux in relation to various aspects:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Mark is the creator of [Redux Toolkit](https://redux-toolkit.js.org/). He begins by detailing the pros and cons of using Redux in relation to various aspects:
```

> - flux-style indirection via dispatching actions instead of direct state mutations,
> - single global centralized store,
> - state updates via reducers and slices.

Reviewer 3: **praise:** 
```suggestion
- Flux-style indirection via dispatching actions instead of direct state mutations
- A single global centralized store
- State updates via reducers and slices
```

Then Mark presents the arguments why he thinks using Redux in 2024 is a good choice:

> - provides a consistent architecture pattern for apps,
> - better understanding of what's happening in the app,
> - widely used,
> - well documented,
> - better update behavior than React Context,
> - Redux Toolkit provides built-in tools standard use cases,
> - [RTK Query](https://redux-toolkit.js.org/rtk-query/overview) data fetching and caching layer,
> - works great with Typescript,
> - designed to work with React but still UI-agnostic.

Reviewer 3: **praise:** 
```suggestion
- Provides a consistent architecture pattern for apps
- Better understanding of what's happening in the app
- Widely used,
- Well documented,
- Better update behavior than React Context,
- Redux Toolkit provides built-in tools standard use cases,
- [RTK Query](https://redux-toolkit.js.org/rtk-query/overview) data fetching and caching layer
- Works great with Typescript
- Designed to work with React but still UI-agnostic
```

At Bedrock, since 2016, we have been trying to standardise the way we use Redux in JS projects by applying [some best practices](https://tech.bedrockstreaming.com/2020/04/27/react-redux-pitfalls-and-best-pratices.html).
We also have been adopting [Redux Toolkit](https://tech.bedrockstreaming.com/2022/06/08/migration-progressive-vers-redux-toolkit.html) for some time with this in mind. And we are always open to new ways of managing state in apps. For example, we are currently testing [XState](https://tech.bedrockstreaming.com/2023/02/08/projet-xstate.html) to manage the state of our player.

### Case Study: Building Accessible Reusable React Components at GitHub - Siddharth Kshetrapal

> 📹 Watch the [video](https://gitnation.com/contents/case-study-building-accessible-reusable-react-components-at-github)

> The talk by Sid focuses on building accessible React components, emphasizing the importance of using the correct HTML elements and [ARIA roles](https://www.w3.org/TR/wai-aria-1.2/) to enhance web accessibility.

Reviewer 4: I think you meant `emphasized` here

```suggestion
The talk by Sid focuses on building accessible React components, emphasizes the importance of using the correct HTML elements and [ARIA roles](https://www.w3.org/TR/wai-aria-1.2/) to enhance web accessibility.
```

Author: Not sure of this one, @yfrommelt it is our text 😄

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
The talk by Sid focuses on building accessible React components, and emphasises on the importance of using the correct HTML elements and [ARIA roles](https://www.w3.org/TR/wai-aria-1.2/) to enhance web accessibility.
```

> Sid highlights practical examples, such as [navigating tab lists](https://www.w3.org/WAI/ARIA/apg/patterns/tabs/) and [handling conditional checkboxes](https://www.w3.org/WAI/ARIA/apg/patterns/checkbox/), explaining how ARIA roles and properties can make web interfaces more accessible, particularly for screen reader users.

Reviewer 4: Maybe ? 

```suggestion
Sid highlights specific examples, such as [navigating tab lists](https://www.w3.org/WAI/ARIA/apg/patterns/tabs/) and [handling conditional checkboxes](https://www.w3.org/WAI/ARIA/apg/patterns/checkbox/), explaining how ARIA roles and properties can make web interfaces more accessible, especially for screen reader users.
```

What we remember from this talk:

- Importance of using correct HTML elements and ARIA roles for accessibility
- Implementation of ARIA roles like `tablist`, `tab`, and `aria-selected`
- Significance of keyboard navigation and ARIA states/properties in accessibility

> - Design considerations for accessibility, including using `aria-disabled` over `disabled`

Reviewer 5: Je trouve qu'il manque une petite conclusion à cet article, que la fin est très abrupte.

Peut-être un mot sur les 3 grandes idées que vous avez retenu de cet événement, ou quelque chose comme ça ?
Ou sur le prochain truc qu'on va améliorer suite à ce qu'on a appris pendant une de ces confs ?

Author: Je vais essayer de faire une phrase de conclusion 😉

Author: Conclusion done 😉
